+++
title = "Debt 5000 Years"
description = "David Graeber"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["economics", "finance", "history"]
+++
Debt 5000 Years is perhaps one of my favorite books ever. Graeber delivers a lot of major revealations into a ton of things I've been interested in for a long time - and debunks a lot of myths of Whig histography. While the stuff about political economy of the book is naturally p. cool and interesting - I think the latter is far more important. Under TINA neoliberalism we are basically bombarded with propaganda about how the modern world is the "best of timelines" and past socities were barbarous and backwards, Graeber however, reminds us of the diversity of kinship relations that exist and the nuanced parameters behind morality and law.

In particular what's really interesting is Graeber's thoughts on slavery. In liberal histography slavery is really not treated with any nuance or historical accuray. All slavery is like the *specific* instantation of chattel slavery in the 16th-19th century nevermind relationships like the jannisaries, eunuchs, etc, etc. Graeber - as a proper scholar - and not an ideologist takes the time to actually look at the origins of slavery and its moral foundations across different socities. What's so interesting here is he saw slavery as a relationship *connected* with debt. A slave was someone seen as having debts that could be paid through their labor, and this was what justified their status. Really, debt slavery still exists in modern society even inthe most "progressive" and "developed" countries.

Graeber sees modern capitalist property relations as something emerging from slavery - which he proves by analysing Roman law. The book has a lot of really good historical accounts - looking at morality in the Bible, Rome, Greece, and the Middle Ages across a variety of places. Graeber is hardly Eurocentric with his analysis which is quite refreshing. I would give the book a solid **9/10**.